the difference between science and
pseudoscience it matters to some of us
more than others
this video is going to talk about that
general question it's going to talk
about the specific example of meditation
scientism pseudoscience in justifying
and glorifying Buddhist meditation and
it's going to talk about the conflict to
myself and one other vegan on YouTube
who identifies herself as a skeptic look
I have actually read the philosophy of
sex this empiric us I'm someone whose
life has been profoundly influenced by
reading various ancient Greek and
ancient Roman philosophers sex this
empirica is one of them I care about
skepticism a lot and my experience in
the Internet has been so unbelievably
negative that I've stopped using the
word skeptic and skepticism because I've
seen how that word has been dragged
through the mud and lost all its meaning
on the Internet today and it's a goddamn
shame skepticism is an important concept
sir science is an important concept it's
important that we really understand what
science is what it isn't and why we
distinguish these things and understand
the difference between science and
pseudoscience matters and it matters to
me personally and as it happens I have a
background in Buddhist philosophy
Buddhist history Buddhist languages
studying the pali canon etc as it
happens I'm in a position to come on the
internet and really warn people that the
excuses being made for Buddhist
meditation the claims that has some
medical benefits they are every bit as
pseudo scientific as parallel claims
that might be offered by Christians
Catholics Protestants etc claiming that
prayer has the same benefits right now I
had the experience of saying this in
forums on the Internet
in forums that are out have the word
skeptic in the title skeptic discussion
forum and then all these people who
identify themselves as skeptics who
identify themselves as atheist pile on
to tell me what a piece of [ __ ] I am for
daring to say that Buddhist meditation
is not vindicated by the highest and
finest court of scientific opinion okay
and it's not
let's throw up some screenshots really
quick from a scientific American article
I can give you a link to this article
it's a
it's to the point however it is a
softball article I'm gonna point out why
it really doesn't come down hard enough
on pseudoscience under the heading of
Buddhist meditation a new paper cites a
2015 review published an American
psychologist magazine reporting that
only around 9% of research into
mindfulness based meditations
pardon me mindfulness based
interventions or meditation has been
tested in clinical trials that included
a control group the authors also point
to multiple large placebo controlled
meta-analysis concluding that
mindfulness practices have often
produced unimpressive results yes um a
little bit of an understatement here I
believe I have read that meta review but
you have to keep in mind what the goal
posts are here if you claim that prayer
Christian prayer calms people down you
can prove that scientifically but
nobody's impressed the question of
unimpressive results matters and it
matters more profoundly than this mere
turn of phrase would indicate if you
take people who are culturally Christian
or forever reason respect prayer as an
action and you use prayer as a method to
calm them down and you then use
scientific or pseudo scientific
measurements to show that they're all
ten percent calm or after prayer does
that prove that prayer is any more
efficacious than taking the to the gym
to work out taking them swimming or is
that it has more of a positive impact on
their lives than just sitting in silence
now prayer may I've seen studies that
looked at elderly people and you take
these elderly people and take them out
to sing and a choir or do other
Christian activities and has all kinds
of positive effects on their health and
well-being and their level of engagement
their level of cognitive function two
elderly people for whom the social
elements of religion chit-chatting with
other people at the church singing at
the church or indeed praying at the
church can have scientifically
measurable effects nevertheless
attributing health benefits to prayer is
pseudoscience the fact that you can
measure something and the fact that
something exists the fact that there's a
Cyrille effect does not automatically
put something in the category of science
rather than pseudoscience so this
question of unimpressive results matters
2014 review of 47 meditation trials
collectively including over 3,500
participants found essentially no
evidence for benefits relating to
enhancing attention curtailing subs
abuse aiding sleep or controlling weight
okay the whole article at Scientific
American is is soft balling it's too
easy on this the the title and the
thesis should have been there is no
evidence for these benefits
this is pseudoscience this is a huge
industry including an industry of
peer-reviewed magazines by the way there
are specialized peer-reviewed
publications where everybody doing the
peer review is deeply IDIA logically
committed to the idea that
Transcendental Meditation has positive
benefits or that Buddhists pseudo
Buddhist mindfulness meditation has
positive benefits peer review means
nothing when the people sitting around
the table doing the peer review are all
religious maniacs and yes I've been a
scholar of Buddhism I've been through
the peer review processes in Buddhism it
ain't science
it's a goddamn joke anyway there is no
evidence that was the second study here
of 2014 the first one mention in 2015 is
not that there's no evidence it's that
the science is junk science
maybe 9% of the scientific studies are
not complete [ __ ] and of those 9%
even then we've got problems and they're
finding very unimpressive results where
we have to ask ourselves is mindfulness
based intervention my invitation is it
actually more effective than just
sitting alone in a room going to the gym
going to going to church singing in the
choir prayer etc we're getting down to
measuring very very small positive
results these people lead author of the
report Nicholas Van Damme a clinical
psychologist and research fellow in
psychological sciences the University of
Melbourne contends potential benefits of
mindfulness are being overshadowed by
hyperbole and oversold for financial
gain gia think mindfulness meditation
training is now a 1.1 billion dollar
industry in the United States alone guys
let me spell this out for you one of the
most powerful ways to make money out of
this kind of therapy is through the
court system as soon as you can get the
prison system in the court system to
believe that mindfulness meditation will
help people be
aggressive less likely to reoffending
similar into society then you can start
getting money out of the government
things are compelling people to pay you
can you then you're really onto a kind
of gravy train so getting this
pseudoscience made into a kind of
surrogate psychotherapy that the
taxpayers will back and the court system
aback is very important you can pause
and read all the text if you want to
click on the link below this video
actually read the whole article it's
pretty short but as I say it is a
softball article next quotation two
trials published earlier this month in
science advances magazine also support
mindfulness practices the first found
mindfulness like attention training
reduces self perceived stress but not
levels of the hormone cortisol a
commonly used biological gauge of stress
levels the other trial links mindfulness
like attention training blah blah blah
look um guys self perceived stress this
is also referred to as a subjectively
perceived stress there are some other
differences the term here how can you
possibly claim that it is any more of a
science to claim that meditation
improves so self receipt stress as
opposed to prayer exactly the same claim
could be made for Christian prayer and
it would be equally as true people who
believe in prayer can calm themselves
down and in their subjective perception
they can feel less stressed out because
they've prayed people who believed in
singing in the choir or other religious
rituals this is a religious ritual why
do people do religious rituals they do
have some subjective effects on self
perceived stress but interestingly they
do not actually in this case have an
impact on your cortisol levels which may
indicate that this is only the
perception of how stressed out you are
and not how stressed out you already are
guys we've been through this in terms of
science versus pseudoscience it's much
more difficult to pin down with
something like massage massage makes
people think they feel better but it
doesn't actually make them feel better
it doesn't actually cure their medical
conditions and as we would say to here
most of the research I saw indicated
that doesn't actually even solve
problems like stress but it makes people
think they're less stressed out it makes
them happier so
some medical doctors will recommend
massage massage therapy even though
massage therapy is not scientifically
vindicated we're in a much more
ideologically loaded confusing a
difficult situation with Buddhist
meditation worming its way into the
scientific and medical establishment
then everyone in the so-called skeptic
community bending over backwards tried
to make excuses for this stuff and
embrace it as science when it should be
reviled as pseudoscience I had a
conflict with another youtuber here that
originated in this mess I still to this
day and hated and reviled by unnatural
vegan a so-called
skeptic because she saw me making catty
remarks in a Facebook group of other
so-called skeptics so everybody in this
group it says skeptic at the top of the
group everyone in the group supposedly a
skeptic everyone in the group identifies
as an atheist but when I post my point
of view as someone with more than 10
years experience in the field someone
who actually learned to read Palli
studied the Pali Canon someone who knows
Buddhist dogma as well as Buddhist
history but as philosophy someone who
really has a very robust proven
background and a couple of peer-reviewed
articles I have every reason to have a
you know deep-seated strongly held view
on Buddhist meditation and all these
people are jumping out of the corners of
this Facebook group for skeptics to make
excuses for Transcendental Meditation
for mindfulness based meditation therapy
for these these different gray area
treatments and unnatural vegan a
self-professed soclety of what does she
do she's on their side she's on the side
of the hippie flower children which is
who she really is what she really is
what she really believes the reality is
unnatural vegan calls herself a skeptic
but she's someone who after completing
her university degree in philosophy
believed in insane hippie pseudoscience
joined an all raw vegan diet and decided
to refuse to use toothpaste because
toothpaste was unnatural and she
basically lost all of her teeth she got
fillings in a whole bunch of her teeth
she destroyed her dental health because
she believed in ludicrous pseudo
scientific opinion and she is another
example of a person which these Facebook
groups are full of and these reddit
groups are full of seen on reddit like
reddit slash our skepticism or whatever
these people who call themselves skeptic
but he will stand up and defend to the
death this notion that the ritual the
religious ritual of Buddhist meditation
is scientifically valid as a treatment
for conditions that in Buddhist doctrine
we do not even claim it cures the actual
function of these Buddhist meditative
meditative practices includes
hallucination includes talking to the
gods does that sound similar to prayer
that remind you of Christian prayer that
you see the gods that you hear the gods
that you interact with the gods that you
literally go up to the heavens and can
talk to Indra okay it also includes a
number of other very specific
experiences referred to as the jhanas
the jhana of the formless feit sphere
the jhana of infinite form there are a
bunch of hard to translate altered
states of mind you can get at through
Buddhist meditation Buddhist meditation
has absolutely nothing to do with these
pseudo scientific claims that have been
attached to it if if there were
scientific value of this kind in
Buddhist meditation it would it if so
facto not be British meditation but
these are people who call themselves X
and nevertheless completely dogmatically
and completely anti skeptically want to
stand up for and defend the modern myth
that Buddhist meditation is a white
Western secular medical practice just as
valid as or even more valid that as than
anything done by psychotherapists
anything come up with by Sigmund Freud
whether or not Sigmund Freud has any
scientific validity is a topic for
another video
but in my conflict with this other
youtuber or natural vegan it's
interesting because the the the source
of the conflict was that she saw me
getting pissed off in a skeptic
discussion forum where I posted
something that's kept discussion forum
saying hey you know what and again I
have more than 10 years of research in
this field I know a lot about Buddhism I
know a lot about Buddhist meditation
history ancient texts philosophy etc etc
I really do have a base say this saying
you know what Buddhist meditation is a
sham if you're looking at it in terms of
these these scientific claims about
Buddhist meditation being some kind of
meta
having some value in medical science it
is every bit as laughable as when
Catholics claim that about prayer all
right on a deep level we have to
recognize what is meditation
meditation is it really a religious
ritual but it's hilarious to me that I
had a rift with a natural vegan and
still to this day because she and her
little hippie heart couldn't stand to
see me so cynically and so confidently
standing up to hypocrite skeptics phony
ass hypocrite skeptics making an excuse
for an Asian religion that they would
never make for a European religion
making an excuse for an Asian religion
they would never make for Catholicism or
Protestantism just because it's a little
bit exotic it's a little bit more
distant they feel like this can be
defended as science and it ain't okay
respecting a foreign religious tradition
foreign literary tradition for and
philosophical tradition means that you
hold it to the same standards you'd hold
your own tradition - okay the same way
I'm willing to interrogate the value of
the works of Aristotle or the value of
the works of Plato with both words of
Shakespeare I bring that same level of
rigor to Buddhist philosophy and in in
doing so if I did any less do you think
I'd be doing them a favor do you think
I'd say oh you people in ancient India I
can't hold you to the same level of
rigor I hold ancient Greek that's
basically a racist attitude that's
basically a condescending attitude
doesn't help anybody doesn't have the
progress of the field right but it is
just as crazy and just as ludicrous to
claim that you have discovered a cure
for depression that can be medically
valid in the pages of Aristotle as it is
to claim that you found a modern medical
cure in the pages of the Pali Canon the
most ancient Buddhist scriptures
especially when you have divorced those
meditative practices from their actual
dogmatic doctrinal and philosophical
function when you vasive created a
modern myth out of ancient oriental bits
and pieces and then tried so hard to
slap the name of science on top of it to
cash in because as that article says
this
is a 1.1 billion dollar industry ibonus
yen